##Linux Command-Line Fundamentals
Overview
This project documents my hands-on learning of Linux command-line fundamentals, focusing on file system navigation and basic file operations. These skills are essential for SOC Analysts and Network Security Analysts, as most security tools, logs, and servers run on Linux-based systems.
Through practical usage, I gained confidence navigating directories, managing files, and understanding how Linux organizes system resources.
🔹 Commands Learned and Practical Understanding
1. pwd – Print Working Directory
The pwd command displays the absolute path of the current working directory.
Purpose:
Helps confirm the current location in the file system
Prevents accidental execution of commands in the wrong directory
Example:
Copy code
Bash
pwd
2. cd – Change Directory
The cd command is used to navigate between directories.
Common Usage:
Copy code
Bash
cd logs      # Move into the logs directory
cd ..        # Move one level up (parent directory)
cd           # Return to home directory
Understanding:
cd takes the user to the home directory
cd .. moves up one directory level, not the previous directory
3. ls – List Directory Contents
The ls command displays files and directories inside a location.
Useful Options:
Copy code
Bash
ls -l    # Shows detailed information (permissions, owner, size)
ls -a    # Shows hidden files
Security Relevance:
Viewing file permissions and ownership helps identify access issues
Useful when analyzing log directories such as /var/log/
4. touch – Create Files
The touch command creates an empty file or updates the timestamp of an existing file.
Example:
Copy code
Bash
touch alert.txt
Use Case:
Creating configuration files or test log files during practice
5. rm – Remove Files and Directories
The rm command deletes files, while rm -r removes directories recursively.
Examples:
Copy code
Bash
rm test.log        # Deletes a file
rm -r test         # Deletes a directory and its contents
Important Note:
rm permanently deletes files (no recycle bin)
Must be used carefully, especially with administrative privileges
6. mv – Move or Rename Files
The mv command is used to move files between directories or rename them.
Examples:
Copy code
Bash
mv old.txt new.txt           # Rename a file
mv alerts.log /var/log/      # Move a file to another directory
Security Context:
Useful for organizing log files
Often requires sudo when interacting with system directories
⚠️ Command Safety Awareness
I also learned the risks of destructive commands such as:
Copy code
Bash
rm *
Understanding:
Deletes all non-hidden files in the current directory
Does not remove directories unless combined with -r
Reinforces the importance of confirming the working directory before executing commands
🎯 Key Skills Gained
Confident navigation of Linux file systems
Safe file creation, deletion, movement, and renaming
Awareness of permission-sensitive system directories
Foundation for log analysis and security tool usage
🔐 Relevance to Cybersecurity & SOC Roles
These Linux fundamentals are critical for:
Navigating log directories (/var/log)
Running and managing security tools (Snort, Suricata, Splunk)
Investigating incidents in Linux server environments
Avoiding operational errors during incident response
